---
title: 'Flops connects minimal models'
date: 2024-05-27
tags:
  - Birational geometry
---

see [2024-5-31](YiLimath.github.io/_posts/2023.10.14.pdf).
### Statement of the theorem

Let $\pi:X \to U$ be projective morphism between normal variety, with $(X,\Delta)$ being KLT and $\Delta$ being big over $U$. Assume $X,Y_1,Y_2$ are $\mathbb{Q}$-factorial.

Assume $\phi_i:X  \dashrightarrow Y_i$ for $i = 1,2$ be two minimal model for $(X,\Delta)$ over $U$. Let $\Gamma_i  = (\phi_i)_* \Delta$. Then $Y_1 \dashrightarrow Y_2$ is a composition of $(K_{Y_i}+\Gamma_i)$-flop over $U$. 

To be more precise, there exist an effective $\mathbf{Q}$-divisor $H$ on $X$ such that $(X, \Delta+D)$ is KLT and a factorization of the birational map 
$$\alpha : X=X_0 \dashrightarrow X_1 \dashrightarrow \cdots \dashrightarrow X_t=X^{\prime} $$
which satisfy the following conditions:
(1) $\alpha_i: X_{i-1} \dashrightarrow X_i(1 \leq i \leq t)$ is a flip for the pair $\left(X_i, \Gamma_i+D_i\right)$ over $S$, where $\Gamma_i$ and $D_i$ are strict transforms of $B$ and $D$, respectively. (so that $-(K_{X_i}+\Gamma_i+D_i)$ is ample over $S$ and ) 
(2) $\alpha_i$ is crepant for $K_{X_{i-1}}+\Gamma_{i-1}$ in the sense that the pull-backs of $K_{X_{i-1}}+\Gamma_{i-1}$ and $K_{X_i}+\Gamma_i$ coincide on a common log resolution. (so that it's a flop)


Before proving the theorem. Let me make few remarks:

> Remark 1. Flops are simplest isomorphism in codimension 1, and it will preserve many nice properties, therefore two minimal models are connected in a simpest way.

> Remark 2. It's conjectured to be true w/o the nef assumption see [1]. And it has been proved that in the toric case this is true.

### Proof. 

First we have the birational map between 2 different minimal models over $U$, with the ample model (log canonical model) $Z$, we will replace the base by the ample model, by [2, Lemma 3.6.5.] we have $K_{Y_i} + \Gamma_i\equiv_Z 0, \quad i = 1,2$. We then pick an ample divisor $H_2$ on $Y_2$ and denote the strict transform on $Y_1$. Since being KLT is an open condition, if we scale the coefficient to be sufficient small, then $K_{Y_1} + \Gamma_1 +H_1$ is still KLT.

We then run the $K_{Y_1} + \Gamma_1 + H_1$-MMP with scaling of a general ample divisor $A$, by standard result of BCHM the minimal model program will terminates at $(Y', \Gamma')$ with $K_{Y'} + \Gamma' + H'$ being nef and by the base point free theorem it's also semi-ample. Thus there is a canonical morphism into the 


### References
[1] ,

[2] 

